I want this project to be long-term and ongoing, and to reflect on what I find fascinating about relational programming, and about computation.  I also want to maintain a sort of Douglas Adams "Hitchiker's Guide"-like perspective, in which the story can always be rewritten---there is no canonical version of the story.

I want to stick to my original plan, which was to record all the writing on the project.  I will not attempt to record all my thinking on the project, which would be impossible anyway.  I will try to keep my record of the writing process as authentic as possible, which includes both my terribly slow typing and many silent work sessions (which my current working environment requires anyway).  Along with pauses as I think...

What I have in mind is closer in spirit to Bronowski's 'The Ascent of Man' or Sagan's 'Cosmos' or Burke's 'Connections' than to an encyclopedic treatment of relational programming.  More like a tour of grant and weird and exciting and baffling and promising and dissappointing parts of relational programming.

I don't think of this as a book, or even a series of books, just like "Hitchhiker's Guide" isn't a book or series---actually, Hitchhiker's started as a BBC radio play, and was also a TV series, and a movie, and additional radio plays, all with different stories!  I want to avoid becoming overly rigid.  Also, Hitchhiker's kept going and evolving and playing.  I want to capture something similar here.  Similar to Touhou Project, as well.  As see this as an evolving, growing project, rather than as a book or website or video series or paper or any other fixed set of static artifacts.

This is also my response to Neil Gaiman's advice of 'finish it' for writers, which I'm sure really is sound advice, and I have finished (under protest and often after the deadline) quite a few things in my life.  I don't intend to finish this one, though.  However, I do intend to have readable or understandable snapshots or artifacts, just like Douglas Adams did indeed have radio plays and books and TV series and a movie and all that.  I just reserve the right to riff on the story of relational programming, and to change my mind about things as I learn more (or forget more!).

Another key aspect about not finishing this project is that I want to tie in both my research (and the research of my collaborators and colleagues) and also the fun, experimental aspect of playing around in the Relational Playground/Wonderland, where we don't really know what's going to happen.  Playing around with miniKanren is great fun, and I haven't been doing much of it.  If I feel like I have to Finish The Big Thing before I can play around, then I don't think either the Big Thing or me (Will-Bill) will be very happy.

Hopefully this project will result in lots of interesting things to explore and play around with and puzzle over and laugh at, which means that it might eventually become a big thing, but I hope it becomes a big thing in being an aggregate of small things, rather than becoming a Big Serious Intimidating Thing, which I never had much use for, and certainly not much use for in exploring relational programming.

Avoiding being Stuck
--------------------
(a) One possible source of being stuck is waiting until I can record a nice video of my writing.  I let that get me stuck for a while, over the past few weeks, largely since recording audio is tricky for me right now, due to working in an environment that is noisy at unpredictable times, and which I can't always make noise (also, at unpredictable times).  However, these types of constraints can be a boon to creativity, and even to productivity.  When I decided to write this year, I quickly found that my wrists started hurting when I typed a lot.  This led to getting a fancy keyboard, switching to Dvorak, having to learn how to type again, etc., which was super slow.  As a result of my slow typing, along with my discomfort writing "in the open" and my uncertainty about my choice of topic, I spent most of my videos talking about writing rather than writing, or complaining about how slow I was typing(!).

Talking about everything I was thinking while working on a book might have served a purpose in the beginning.  However, it's not how I actually write---certainly not while I'm writing alone, at least.  Recording silent writing sessions is a much closer approximation of reality.  In fact, it is the normal reality for when I'm writing alone, except for times I might read a sentence aloud to hear how it sounds.  So, I like that these silent writing videos: (1) allow me to write (and record the writing) whenever I want; (2) lessen the distraction of trying to explain everything I'm thinking, when I should be thinking about what I'm doing; and (3) more authentically represent what it's like for me to write alone.

(b) Another way I got stuck early on was to try to save every part of the writing process for a video.  Whatever I type at a keyboard is only a portion of my full writing process, which largely involves curling up into a ball on the couch or on the bed, staring at the ceiling, or closing my ideas, and letting thoughts drift around in my head, followed by frantically writing a few words on a notepad next to me.  Or writing notes to myself on my phone.  Or thinking about the ideas in the shower.  Or talking with friends.  Etc.  So, I will record my writing sessions, and the things I do on the computer, to the extent I can.  (I checked in a file I created during my last recorded writing session after I ended the recording so I wouldn't lose the file---stuff like that doesn't count!)  I will also try to share the *product* of my thinking and conversations---for example, in the form of the `topics.txt` file, which contains a few of the possible topics for the Wonderland, based on my various notes to myself.

(c) Another way I got stuck early on was to start writing about a "warmup" topic, rather than going straight at the thing I *really* wanted to write about.  This, perhaps, was a natural process of getting *me* warmed up, and getting up my courage, to tackle this far more expansive topic of my personal view of computation, told from a relational standpoint.  But after a few changes of topics and books, I'm back at what I thought about in July of 2023 but was too intimidated to try to bite off, because I knew it could be a huge undertaking, and I was afraid I'd quit yet again.  I think I'm over that now---after all, this is the topic I've been dreaming about for a year or more, and named the Discord server after!

(d) Another way I've gotten stuck in the past, and a big hurdle for this Imperishable Wonderland project, is chasing after a notion of the Platonic ideal whatever (a doujinshi version of relational programming exploration, in this case).  One type of perfectionism is waiting until I have just the right infrastructure for everything.  The perfect typesetting system, or the perfect executable computational medium, or whatever it is.  I have fallen into a bit of a rabbit hole with fancy LaTeX typesetting in the past, and in the future I probably want to avoid needing a dozen Perl scripts to typeset a book.  Still, I know LaTeX well, and don't really get stuck on the LaTeX itself, only on some Platonic ideal of what the Perfect Book would look like.  Since I'm going Hitchhiker Style, and I reserve the right to create a different yet kinda similar version of whatever I've created in the past, in whichever medium makes the most sense (or the least sense), I don't want to become overly concerned with whether I'm using LaTeX, Markdown, HTML, some weird format supported by Pandoc, Racket's Scribble, SGML, plaintext, Emacs org mode, an iPython notebook, a Livecode, etc.  As I work, I'm sure I'll have plenty of ideas as to what I can do.  For example, I have this vision of using my own drawings and paintings within a book.  Plenty of opportunity for that.  I shouldn't wait until I'm Picasso until I start writing the book, though!  I can be a just-in-time Picasso.  Similarly, maybe at some point I'll build some Scheme or Racket or miniKanren infrastructure to abstract over any concrete representation of the Wonderland.  For now, though, LaTeX will do, since that's what I know inside out.  (Well, I know how to do lots of horrible hacks, at least, although I hope it won't come to that.)

So, with that in mind, I'm going to kick off my expression of the Winderland in LaTeX, trying to keep it on the simpler side if I can.  However, I'll do what the Wonderland requires, so I reserve the right to write complicated LaTeX if needed.  And at some point I will probably revisit the format.  However, the important thing is to *write*!  The Wonderland awaits us.
